[DOC] Backup & Restore Security Configuration (#42970)
elastic/elasticsearch: x-pack/docs/en/security/backup-security-configuration.asciidoc

all these configurations as a whole. Cherry-picking only {security-features}
configurations complicates the procedure a bit, without many benefits because
, after all, every configuration requires a backup! All the other <<security-files, configuration
files>>  and the `.security` index contain exclusively {security-features}
configuration data.

[float]
==== Backup of File Configuration

The simplest way to backup file based configuration is a trivial copy of the
`$ES_PATH_CONF` directory.  Overall, this is the identical procedure as for a
complete backup.  Also, remember that in a typical {es} deployment all files
are identical on every node.

Because changes to the configuration files usually require a node restart for
the changes to take effect, this configuration method is reserved for settings
that change rarely (or are required for cluster formation, or require file
system privileges for modifications). In a typical deployment, once a desired
configuration is attained, subsequent changes will be infrequent.

Given this, it is recommended to backup after every modification. For the YAML
text files you also have the option of storing diffs against a baseline, or

> checking them into `git`, therefore making the changes more easi to review by

Reviewer: nit: easi -> easy

the limited `snapshot_user` role. This role grants privileges to create
snapshots in any existing repositories. It also grants privileges to list and
read settings for all indices (but no data).
+
--
The following example creates a new user `snapshot_user` in the native realm:

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/user/snapshot_user
{
  "password" : "secret",
  "roles" : [ "snapshot_user" ]
}
--------------------------------------------------

And the next one exemplifies the create snapshot operation, inside the
`my_backup` repository:

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT /_snapshot/my_backup/snapshot_1
{
  "indices": ".security",
  "include_global_state": true <1>
}
--------------------------------------------------

<1> A few {security-features} settings are stored in the global cluster metadata as
persistent settings. These are included in the snapshot by, but for facilitating
change reviews as well as restore convenience, we can pull them out to stand in
their own file.

[source,shell]
--------------------------------------------------

> curl -X GET -u elastic "localhost:9200/_cluster/settings?pretty&flat_settings" | jq '.persistent | with_entries(select(.key|startswith("xpack.security")))'

Reviewer: We could maybe improve how `filter_path` works with `flat_settings`so that we don't expect users to rely on an external tool like `jq` to filter out specific settings by names.

Author: Great suggestion @tlrx, I have raised https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/issues/43290

Afterwards, users with the limited `snapshot_user` built-in role can create
snapshots inside that repository. This role grants privileges to create
snapshots in any existing repositories. It also grants privileges to list and
read settings for all indices (but not to read data).

For more information, see {stack-ov}/security-privileges.html[Security privileges]
and {stack-ov}/built-in-roles.html[Built-in roles].
--

. Create users that have the `snapshot_user` built-in role.
+
--
The following example creates a new user `snapshot_user` in the native realm:

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/user/snapshot_user
{
  "password" : "secret",
  "roles" : [ "snapshot_user" ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
--

. Create a snapshot.
+
--
The following example exemplifies the create snapshot operation, inside the
`my_backup` repository:

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT /_snapshot/my_backup/snapshot_1
{
  "indices": ".security",
  "include_global_state": true <1>
}
--------------------------------------------------

<1> A few security settings are stored in the global cluster metadata as

> persistent settings. These are included in the snapshot by, but for facilitating

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
persistent settings. These are included in the snapshot by default, but for facilitating
```

the security details.

[float]
[[backup-security-files]]
==== Backing up configuration files

The simplest way to backup configuration files is to copy the `$ES_PATH_CONF`
directory. Overall, this procedure is identical to a complete backup.

TIP: In a typical {es} deployment, all the configuration files are identical on
each node.

It is recommended that you back up the configuration files every time they are
modified. In a typical deployment, after you achieve a desired configuration,
you update these files infrequently. If you change the contents of the
configuration files, the changes usually don't take effect until you restart
the node. Therefore, configuration files should contain only the settings that
change rarely or are required for cluster formation or require file system
privileges.

For the YAML text files, you also have the option of storing diffs against a
baseline or checking them into `git`. This method makes it easier for the {es}
administrator to review the changes.

The binary and encoded files, such as the private keys and the secure store
file, are extra sensitive; they require restricted read access.

[float]
[[backup-security-snapshots]]

> ==== Backing up API-based configuration

Reviewer 2: This title is a bit unclear. Could we change it to something like this?
```suggestion
==== Snapshotting security indices and global cluster metadata
```

  "roles" : [ "snapshot_user" ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
--

. Create a snapshot.
+
--
The following example exemplifies the create snapshot operation, inside the
`my_backup` repository:

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT /_snapshot/my_backup/snapshot_1
{
  "indices": ".security",
  "include_global_state": true <1>
}
--------------------------------------------------

<1> A few security settings are stored in the global cluster metadata as
persistent settings. These are included in the snapshot by, but for facilitating
change reviews as well as restore convenience, we can pull them out to stand in
their own file.

[source,shell]
--------------------------------------------------
curl -X GET -u elastic "localhost:9200/_cluster/settings?pretty&flat_settings" | jq '.persistent | with_entries(select(.key|startswith("xpack.security")))'
--------------------------------------------------
// NOTCONSOLE

You can store the output of this together with the other configuration files.

NOTE: Transient settings are not considered for backup.

--

[float]
[[backup-security-repos]]
===== Controlling access to the backup repository

> Exposing the contents of the `.security` index by having a third party read the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a third party reads the snapshot and exposes the contents of the `.security` index, 
```

> snapshot does not equate to compromised cluster security. An attacker would

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
it does not mean you have compromised cluster security. An attacker would
```

> still need to brute force cryptographic hashes before it can impersonate users

Reviewer 2: Not sure if an attacker is an it or they?
```suggestion
still need to brute force cryptographic hashes before they can impersonate users
```

--------------------------------------------------
GET /_snapshot/my_backup
--------------------------------------------------
--

. Add a new user with the `superuser` built-in role to the file based realm.
+
--
For example, create a user named `jacknich`:
[source,shell]
--------------------------------------------------
 bin/elasticsearch-users useradd jacknich -p password -r superuser
--------------------------------------------------
--

. Using the previously created user, delete the existing `.security-6` or
`.security-7` index.
+
--
[source,shell]
--------------------------------------------------
curl -u jacknich-X DELETE "localhost:9200/.security-7"
--------------------------------------------------

WARNING: After this step authentication will not work; all API calls will fail.

--

. Using the same user, restore the `.security` index from the snapshot.
+
--
[source,shell]
--------------------------------------------------
 curl -u jacknich -X POST "localhost:9200/_snapshot/my_backup/snapshot_1/_restore" -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d'
 {
    "indices": ".security-7",
    "include_global_state": true
 }
 '
--------------------------------------------------

> NOTE: Restoring the global state is optional, but it will help make sure the

Reviewer 2: There is information missing here after "the"

--

. Copy the backup configuration details by overwriting the contents of
`$ES_PATH_CONF` and restart the node.
+
--
This step is common to every other backup restore.
--

. Cherry-pick and

> <<cluster-update-settings,apply the persistent secure settings>> from earlier.

Reviewer 2: I think this step needs more information since it wasn't clear to me what "earlier" was referring to or what exact steps I needed to perform here.

[role="xpack"]
[[backup-restore-security-configuration]]
=== Backing up and restoring security configuration

The {es} {security-features} are configured by files and by various API
endpoints. The security settings, which are prefixed with `xpack.security`, are
ordinarily included in regular backups. However, the backup is not complete
until a special index, which holds most of the non-setting configuration, is
also included. Hence, the backup and restore of the security configuration
entails an extra step to a conventional backup and restore.

[float]
[[backup-security-files-location]]
==== Location of security configuration files

> The configuration files reside on every node and are usually identical across

Author: You are right. I will describe a bit the configurations touched in these files and I will link to https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/security-files.html

nodes. They are formatted as YAML text files. Also, on every node there is a
secure store file named `elasticsearch.keystore`, which is binary formatted.
This file is used only for sensitive settings such as service passwords. Some
setting values are paths pointing to other files, such as the keys and
certificates to configure TLS. Reassuringly, all these files are stored inside
the `$ES_PATH_CONF` directory, so when you back up the whole directory, as part
of a conventional backup, you capture all of the file-based configuration for
the {security-features}.

> 

Author: Thanks! Indeed, I will go with option 2 `Move the instructions up` I have an idea of separating file-based configuration from snapshot based ones.

[float]
[[backup-security-configuration-inside-cluster]]

> ==== Security configuration inside the cluster

Author: > Are API-Keys really configuration?

Good point, but _.security_ does contain role mappings which are configuration. So it contains both _data_ and _configuration_ , let me see how I can rephrase it all.

The API calls act on configuration information that is stored in the global
cluster metadata as well as inside a dedicated {es} index. This index is named
`.security-6` in the 6.x versions and `.security-7` in the 7.x releases. The
`.security` alias always points to the appropriate index. This index contains
the data which is *not* part of an ordinary configuration backup. This data
describes:

* the definition of users in the native realm (including hashed passwords)
* role definitions
* role mappings
* application privileges
* API keys

> Be advised that the index format is only compatible over a single major version.

Author: > "cannot be restored onto a version earlier that the version from which it originated"

Good point!

TIP: The `elasticsearch.yml` and `elasticsearch.keystore` files and the global
cluster metadata contain settings for all the {stack} features. The
`.security` index and all the other
<<security-files,security configuration files>> contain configuration data
exclusively for the {security-features}. It is easiest to backup and restore all
the configuration information as a whole, rather than trying to cherry-pick only

> the security details.

Author: This needs polishing. I will try to not allude to security-only backup.

[float]
[[backup-security-files]]
==== Backing up configuration files

The simplest way to backup configuration files is to copy the `$ES_PATH_CONF`

> directory. Overall, this procedure is identical to a conventional backup.

Author: Correct, I'll try to single out file-based configuration backup.

infrequently. Configuration files purposefully contain only the settings that
change rarely or are required for cluster formation or require file system
privileges.

TIP: For the YAML text files, you also have the option of storing diffs against a
baseline or checking them into `git`. This method makes it easier for the {es}
administrator to review the changes.

The binary and encoded files, such as the private keys and the secure store
file, are extra sensitive; they require restricted read access.

[float]
[[backup-security-snapshots]]
==== Snapshotting the security index and the global cluster metadata

To back up API-based configuration, which is stored inside the cluster, you use
the <<modules-snapshots,regular snapshot functionality>>. The snapshot API
saves the settings, the type mapping, and the contents of any index to a
location on a cloud storage service or on a shared network file system. This is
used to snapshot the `.security` index. The snapshot operation can also
optionally capture the persistent settings from the global cluster metadata.

. Create a repository that you can use to backup the `.security` index.

> Ideally this repository is dedicated only to this scope.

Reviewer 3: I think if we're going to say this (`Ideally ...`) then we need to explain why.

Personally, I would recommend that customers think about snapshoting the `.kibana` data to this same repo. 

If I were the admin, I would probably have:
- One repo for "my" data. It would have have the indices, and we'd have to decide whether the costs are justified depending on data volumes (do we really need to keep snapshots of 180 days worth of log files)?
- Another repo for "system" data. `.security`, `.kibana*`, `.ml-*` and cluster state

That might be a bad idea (please say so), if we're going to same a particular configuration is "ideal" we need to have reasons why.

Author: "system" data and cluster state inside a separate repo sounds good to me. Probably `.kibana` contains even more sensitive data (un-hashed credentials), but I don't believe that there is any compounded risk if `.security` and `.kibana` get together.

However, for this iteration, I would keep `.kibana` and `.ml-*` out of the discussion, for the reason that we might make assertions that need testing so they don't become stale. If you feel we should mention them in this context only, I am fine with that.

Reviewer 3: I'm happy to be a little big vague, and just talk about separating system indices into their own repository. And if ES is their primary datastore, their own apps might have a "configuration" index that they decide to snapshot alongside the `.` indices. That's up to them.

I know that our support team often encourage people to take snapshots of the kibana indices, even if they can't justify the cost of snapshotting their own data. It would be good if our instructions here aligned with the advice they give.

When we've got a finished version, it's probably worth asking someone from `@elastic/support-tech-leads`  to review so they can update their internal docs, or tell us if there's conflicting advice.

+
--
[source,js]
-----------------------------------
PUT /_snapshot/my_backup
{
  "type": "fs",
  "settings": {
    "location": "my_backup_location"
  }
}
-----------------------------------
// CONSOLE
// TESTSETUP

You must have the elevated `manage` cluster privilege to create it, yet it's a

> relatively infrequent operation. The elevated privileges are required to prevent

Reviewer 3: It's my _personal preference_ to leave the `yet ...` commentary out.  Just call it like it is.

> Creating a snapshot repository requires the `manage` cluster privilege.

regular users from exfiltrating data to locations of their choosing.

Afterwards, users with the limited `snapshot_user` built-in role can create
snapshots inside that repository. This role grants privileges to create
snapshots in any existing repositories. It also grants privileges to list and

> read settings for all indices (but not to read data).

Reviewer 3: I think it's worth explicitly calling out the `.security` index here.

For more information, see {stack-ov}/security-privileges.html[Security privileges]
and {stack-ov}/built-in-roles.html[Built-in roles].
--

. Create users that have the `snapshot_user` built-in role.
+
--
The following example creates a new user `snapshot_user` in the native realm:

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
POST /_security/user/snapshot_user
{
  "password" : "secret",
  "roles" : [ "snapshot_user" ]
}
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE
--

. Create a snapshot.
+
--

> The following example exemplifies the create snapshot operation, inside the

Reviewer 3: I think `example exemplifies` might be a tautological tautology. 
```suggestion
The following example shows how to use the create snapshot API to backup
the security index to the `my_backup` repository.
```

`my_backup` repository:

[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
PUT /_snapshot/my_backup/snapshot_1
{
  "indices": ".security",
  "include_global_state": true <1>
}
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE

<1> A few security settings are stored in the global cluster metadata as
persistent settings. These are included in the snapshot by default, but for
facilitating change reviews as well as restore convenience, we can pull them
out to stand in their own file.

[source,shell]
--------------------------------------------------
curl -X GET -u elastic "localhost:9200/_cluster/settings?pretty&flat_settings" | jq '.persistent | with_entries(select(.key|startswith("xpack.security")))'
--------------------------------------------------

You can store the output of this together with the other configuration files.

NOTE: Transient settings are not considered for backup.

--

[float]
[[backup-security-repos]]
===== Controlling access to the backup repository

If a third party reads the snapshot and exposes the contents of the `.security`

> index, it does not mean you have compromised cluster security. An attacker

Reviewer 3: That's a broad statement to make.

Depending on the type of users that are stored, you may have regulatory reporting requirements if such a backup was exposed, even though it only has hashed passwords.

I think we need to tone down this wording.

I would have something along the lines of 

>The snapshot of the security index will typically contain sensitive data such
> as user names and password hashes. 
> Because password are stored using cryptographic hashes _(link to hashing config)_
> the disclosure of a snapshot would not automaticaly allow a third party 
> to authenticate as one of your users, but it would disclose confidential information.
> We recommend that you ...   
>
> It is also important that you protected the integrity of these backups in case you
> ever need to restore them. If a third party is able to modify the stored backups
> they may be able to install a back door that would grant access if the snapshot
> is loaded into an {es} cluster.

index is sensitive to changes. Modifications to that index have the potential
to compromise the integrity of all the data in the cluster. To prevent this
situation:

* Snapshot the `.security` index in a dedicated repository, where read and write
access is strictly restricted and audited.
* If there are indications that the snapshot has been read, change the passwords
of the users in the native realm and revoke API keys.
* If there are indications that the snapshot has been tampered with, do not
restore it. There is currently no option for the restore process to detect
malicious tampering.

The same recommendations apply to storing backups for configuration files.
However, use special caution when you store the `elasticsearch.keystore` and
private key file backups. Currently, the secure store is *not* password
protected and any read access can compromise the passwords of external systems
and private keys.

[float]
[[restore-security-configuration]]
==== Restoring security configuration

NOTE: You can restore a snapshot of the `.security` index only if it was created
in the same major release version. The last minor version of every major release

> can convert and read both versions of the index.

Reviewer 3: I know what you mean, but I don't think `both versions` is self-explanatory here.

To restore your security configuration from a backup, log in to one of the node
hosts, navigate to {es} installation directory, and follow these steps:

. Make sure the repository holding the `.security` snapshot is installed.
+
--
[source,js]
--------------------------------------------------
GET /_snapshot/my_backup
--------------------------------------------------
// CONSOLE
--

. Add a new user with the `superuser` built-in role to the file based realm.
+
--
For example, create a user named `jacknich`:
[source,shell]
--------------------------------------------------
bin/elasticsearch-users useradd jacknich -p password -r superuser
--------------------------------------------------
--

. Using the previously created user, delete the existing `.security-6` or
`.security-7` index.
+
--
[source,shell]
--------------------------------------------------

> curl -u jacknich -X DELETE "localhost:9200/.security-7"

Reviewer 3: Why are you electing to put this in `shell` rather than `console`?

Author: This doesn't look like a Kibana/GUI type of operation to me. And the user already has a `shell` on the local node, so this might come easier to him. But it's prob my brain that associates hackish operations like these with cmd lines.

--------------------------------------------------

> WARNING: After this step authentication will not work; all API calls will fail.

Reviewer 3: This is not quite true of course. The file based user that we just created will keep working.
I think this statement might worry someone who is trying to follow the instructions during an emergency.

```suggestion
WARNING: After this step any authentication that relies on the `.security`
index will not work. This means that all API calls that authenticate with
native or reserved users will fail, as will any user that relies on a native role.
The file-realm user we created in the step above will continue to work
because it is not stored in the security index, and uses the builtin
`superuser` role.
```

Author: Thanks for the suggestion!

--

. Using the same user, restore the `.security` index from the snapshot.
+
--
[source,shell]
--------------------------------------------------
 curl -u jacknich -X POST "localhost:9200/_snapshot/my_backup/snapshot_1/_restore" -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d'
 {
    "indices": ".security-7",
    "include_global_state": true
 }
 '
--------------------------------------------------

NOTE: The `include_global_state` is optional but it will help to make sure the
configuration in the index is compatible with the rest of the configuration in
the cluster, as was the case at the time of the snapshot. But be advised that

> this will also restore non-security persistent cluster seetting.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
this will also restore non-security persistent cluster settings.
```

> this will also restore non-security persistent cluster seetting.

Reviewer 3: I think it would be helpful to provide more guidance here.
Depending on what caused the problem that requires security restore, and how old the security backup is, either `true` or `false` could be the right choice here.
If I were reading this while trying to restore a cluster in a Sev1 indicent, I'd like to be given more info about my choice.

--

. Optionally, cherry-pick and <<cluster-update-settings,apply the persistent
settings>> that you have extracted with the `GET _cluster/settings` API, if you
need to review and override the settings that were included in the snapshot (by
the `include_global_state` flag).

> Lastly, if your backup included configuration files copy these and overwrite

Reviewer 3: Per the above, whether this is needed depends on the nature of the incident. Do you think we can provide a bit more of a guide here?

the contents of `$ES_PATH_CONF` and restart the node. This needs to be done on

> *every node*. Usually rolling restarts won't work, a full cluster restart is

Reviewer 3: > Usually rolling restarts won't work

Why do we think this? It obviously depend on what happened, but it seems a bit off to me.
I think it's more like:
```suggestion
*every node*. Depending on the extent of the differences between your current
cluster configuration and the restored configuration, you may not be able to
perform a rolling restart. 
If you are performing a full restore of your configuration directory, we recommend
a full cluster restart as the safest option.
Alternatively, you may wish to restore you configuration files to a separate
location on disk and use file comparison tools to review the differences between
your existing configuration and the restored configuration.
```

Author: I tried to generalize, but you're right the more common settings (prob realm settings) would work in a restore in a rolling restart fashion.
